once around
Vega. Vega, one of the brightest stars
in the sky, fifth brightest of all, is
Alpha Lyra, the brightest star in the
constellation of Lyra, which is supposed
to be a Greek musical instrument and
consists of Vega and a small
parallelogram of stars next to
it. Very bright indeed, magnitude zero.
And the name Vega is from the Arabic and
it means the falling eagle. So this time
it has nothing to do with the Greek
musical instruments at
all. Vega is the third member of the
summer triangle after Denb and Alter
making up that very striking and easily
recognized pattern in the summer sky
from the northern hemisphere.
Popularized by HA Ray in the states and
by Patrick Moore in the UK.
Being so bright, it was the subject of
the first ever astronomical photograph
of a star. This was a dgerro type taken
by Whipple and Bond back in 1850. Uh
they chose wisely because of the uh nice
position and brightness of
Vega. Now, we've been able to measure
the distance and show that it's one of
the sun's relatively near neighbors,
just 25 light years from us. a light
year. 10 trillion kilometers, 6 thou uh
six trillion miles is the distance a
light beam will travel in one
year. Now, because the Earth's axis is
not completely stable, it wobbles. It
precesses round in a loop. The polar
axis of Earth currently points to the
North Star,
Polaris, but it has not always been so,
and it won't be
again. 12,000 years ago, Vega was
actually closest to being the pole star,
just a few degrees away from that
perfect alignment. And the wobble of the
Earth takes nearly 26,000 years. So, in
14,000 years time, Vega will be back
aligned with the
pole. What do we know about Vega? Well,
it's a
bright Aclass main sequence star, 2.15
times the mass of the sun and 2.75 times
the
radius. But that extra mass means that
it is pumping out energy at quite a
rate. It's 47 times the brightness, the
power output of the sun. The overall
luminosity quite considerably greater,
nearly 50 times as
much. We also can tell that it is
spinning around. This is quite common
with these larger Aclass stars for them
to be fast spinners. And this one is
just taking
16.5 hours to go round once on its axis.
Now the sun takes 26 days to do that. So
these are really quite fast. It tends to
make these stars rather oblate. Although
from our point of view, we are looking
at the pole of Vega. So it's pretty much
pole on to us. So, we'll be seeing it
spinning around and you don't really
quite get the same sense of the the uh
elliptical nature as a
result. That has other impacts for us as
well, but we'll come on to those.
It is however elliptical enough that the
gravitational
darkening, the equator being
fatter and therefore further out and
lower pressure results in the
temperature varying across the surface
from about
10,000° Kelvin at the poles to about
2,000° less at the equator. But again,
we're looking at it pole on. So we uh
see the equator around the rim and the
pole in the center of the
star. Spectrum wise, here's a lovely
spectrum that's been taken showing the
peak of the output way up into the blue
and a little bit of violet light coming
out there as well. and all those lovely
hydrogen lines from the hydrogen
spectrum characteristic of a main
sequence star with hydrogen in its outer
envelope. Now there's some debate about
this. The age of Vega is sometimes
quoted as 700 million years and other
times as 450 million years.
And with its mass and power output, it
seems likely to me that it's on the
younger end of that because the lifespan
of a star with 2.15 times the solar mass
and 50 times the power output uh would
be roughly 25 times less than you would
get for a star like the sun. And so the
age of 700 million years does not quite
compute. So, I'm going to have to come
back to this one at some point in the
future and revise the slides when we
have got to the bottom of this one. It's
a bit of a
mystery.
Planetwise, there were reports actually
of a 22 Earth mass planet in a very
close orbit around the
star just uh 2.43 days to whiz around.
But I'm not sure that that's entirely
confirmed at this stage. And there have
certainly been two dust rings further
out detected. But again, that pole on to
us aspect means that a an orbiting
planet orbiting around the equator would
never transit in front. So the transit
method of planet detection can't work.
And a radial velocity method can't work
either because
the influence of the planet would not
cause any motion to and fro along our
line of sight if it was in a vaguely
equatorial orbit. That would be very
difficult to detect
indeed. But doesn't stop people
speculating about planets. And of
course, the sci-fi gets in on the act as
well. And I love this movie, Contact
with Jodie Foster, where she picks up
radio signals from um the direction of
Vega. And as a result, uh a warp machine
blueprints are beamed down and they
build the machine and it creates a warp
tunnel through which Jod travels out to
uh a hypothetical planet around the star
Vega.
very very good
film. Now I mentioned the dust rings
that go around the planet and this is
the latest picture from the James Webb
Space Telescope. Much better than Hubble
was able to achieve which suffered all
sorts of distortions
uh probably down to that very early
fault that they had with the mirror. But
uh James Webb is producing this
immaculate image here. The central stars
being blotted out with a black disc. And
we have these rings, two rings and a
halo of dust. And the amazing thing
about these is that they are so smooth.
This smoothness and symmetry to
them tells us that there are no
significant planetsized objects, nor any
companion stars in the neighborhood.
Otherwise we would see lumps, bumps and
distortions inside this uh disc around
Vega. So I think we can probably rule
out the possibility that there are any
companions stellar or planetary of any
sort. Um there might be some very small
asteroids or comets but nothing of any
uh great mass. So thanks very much for
listening. I've hope you've enjoyed a
little bit of a tour once around the
Star Vega.